Roll the dice example for elixir/phoenix (#2685)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/instrumentation/erlang/getting-started/phoenix.md

---
title: Phoenix
weight: 2
---

This guide will show you how to get started with OpenTelemetry in the Phoenix
Web Framework.

You will learn how you can instrument a simple application automatically, in
such a way that traces are emitted to the console.

## Prerequisites

Ensure that you have erlang, elixir, postgres (or the database of your choice),
and phoenix installed locally. The phoenix
[installation guide](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/installation.html) will help you
get set up with everything you need.

## Example Application

The following example uses a basic [Phoenix](https://www.phoenixframework.org/)
web application. For more elaborate examples, see
[examples](/docs/instrumentation/erlang/examples/).

To begin, use the `phx` generator to create a new project

```shell

> mix phx.new your_app_name

Reviewer: I think instead of `your_app_name` this should just use the example app name that'll go in the -contrib repo examples.

Author: Question about this: there's a [basic_phoenix_ecto](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-erlang-contrib/tree/main/examples/basic_phoenix_ecto), I assume this would be a separate `dice` (`dice_game`?) example in addition to that one?

Reviewer: Yup, a separate dice game example.

```

Press `n` when asked to fetch and install dependencies, we'll do that after the
next step.

ℹ️ Throughout this guide I will use `your_app_name` or `YourAppName`, be sure to
replace these with your actual application's name.

### Dependencies

We'll need a few other dependencies that Phoenix doesn't come with as well.

- `opentelemetry_api`: contains the interfaces you'll use to instrument your
  code. Things like `Tracer.with_span` and `Tracer.set_attribute` are defined
  here.
- `opentelemetry`: contains the SDK that implements the interfaces defined in
  the API. Without it, all the functions in the API are no-ops.
- `opentelemetry_exporter`: allows you to send your telemetry data to an
  OpenTelemetry Collector and/or to self-hosted or commercial services.

> - `opentelemetry_ecto`: creates OpenTelemetry spans from the Elixir `:telemetry`

Reviewer: Ecto should be left out from the example since it isn't used. We want this to start without a database. But since it is likely any user will have Ecto it should definitely include a link and mention of `opentelemetry_ecto`.

Should also add a link to the demo, https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-demo/tree/main/src/featureflagservice, and examples dir of contrib, https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-erlang-contrib/tree/main/examples/, saying something like, 'for more complete Phoenix/Ecto projects see these'.

Author: Should the example be explicitly created with `--no-ecto`?

Reviewer: Yea.

      {attributes,128,infinity,0,
                  #{'http.status_code' => 200,
                    'http.client_ip' => <<"127.0.0.1">>,
                    'http.flavor' => '1.1','http.method' => <<"GET">>,
                    'http.scheme' => <<"http">>,'http.target' => <<"/">>,
                    'http.user_agent' =>
                        <<"Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_15_7) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/112.0.0.0 Safari/537.36">>,
                    'net.transport' => 'IP.TCP',
                    'net.host.name' => <<"localhost">>,
                    'net.host.port' => 4000,'net.peer.port' => 62839,
                    'net.sock.host.addr' => <<"127.0.0.1">>,
                    'net.sock.peer.addr' => <<"127.0.0.1">>,
                    'http.route' => <<"/">>,'phoenix.action' => home,
                    'phoenix.plug' =>
                        'Elixir.OtelPhxSetupWeb.PageController'}},
      {events,128,128,infinity,0,[]},
      {links,128,128,infinity,0,[]},
      undefined,1,false,
      {instrumentation_scope,<<"opentelemetry_phoenix">>,<<"1.1.0">>,
                             undefined}}
```

> These are the raw structured logs that will get sent when you configure the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are the raw Erlang records that will get serialized and sent when you configure the
```

number between 1 and 6.

To start, we'll add a route to the `/api` scope in your router

```elixir
# lib/your_app_name_web/router.ex
scope "/api", OtelPhxSetupWeb do
  pipe_through :api

  get "/rolldice", DiceController, :roll
end
```

Then we'll create a new file in the controllers folder for that module. We told
the router that we will define a roll function, so we'll do that. It will return
a `200` response code and the result of a `dice_roll` function, which we will
emit a span for. We also want to set the value of the generated roll as an
attribute on the span.

```elixir
# lib/your_app_name_web/controllers/dice_controller.ex
defmodule YourAppNameWeb.DiceController do
  use YourAppNameWeb, :controller
  require OpenTelemetry.Tracer, as: Tracer

  def roll(conn, _params) do
    send_resp(conn, 200, dice_roll())
  end

  defp dice_roll do
    Tracer.with_span("dice_roll") do
      roll = Enum.random(1..6)

      Tracer.set_attribute(:roll, roll)

      to_string(roll)
    end
  end
end

```

If you point your browser/curl/etc. to `http://localhost:4000/api/rolldice` you
should get a random number in response, and a few spans in your console. I'll

> point out some of the most relevant bits.

Reviewer: Should give some details about how this is showing the span name and attributes for 2 spans.

---
title: Phoenix

> aliases: [/docs/erlang/getting_started/phoenix]

Reviewer 2: No need for an alias:

```suggestion
```
